---
layout: blog
published: true
title: Consumption Patterns in Arab Countries AFED Public Opinion Survey
category: blog
language: english
comments: true
tags: 
  - Energy
  - Water
  - Consumption
  - Efficiency
  - Environment
  - Arab Countries
author: Najib Saab, Secretary General – AFED
affiliation: 
splash: "https://farm8.staticflickr.com/7538/15409931713_5755eae46a_t.jpg"
youtubeid: 
commit_message: commit message
---
The Arab public is ready to pay more for energy and water and embrace changes in consumption patterns if this will help preserve resources and protect the environment, according to a survey carried out by Arab Forum for Environment and Development [AFED](http://www.afedonline.org/en/) in 22 countries. 
<!-- more -->
However, good intentions and wishes of the public, as demonstrated in the survey results, are not enough, as putting change into action requires the introduction of appropriate enabling conditions by governments. While public awareness and education are important tools to demonstrate the benefits of sustainable consumption on human health and the environment, regulations and incentives are indispensable to transform intentions into action. Implementing energy and water conservation measures on a large scale requires revising subsidies. Renewable energy will not be deployed extensively as long as conventional fuels are sold at fraction of their real market price. Equally, phasing out subsidies needs to be accompanied by direct economic and social benefits, mainly job creation, providing education and health coverage, alongside securing appropriate income levels and pension schemes. 

When a vast 84% majority of the people accept to eat more fish than red meat, which is better for the environment as well as health, the fact remains that good intentions cannot be transformed into action until fish is made available in abundant quantities and at affordable prices. 

As safeguarding the environment and ensuring sustainable management of natural resources are the main driving concerns for consumption patterns, the survey also examined public attitudes regarding some general environmental challenges, focusing on water, energy and food. This allowed comparison with previous surveys carried by AFED on public opinion attitudes towards environmental challenges in 2006, and on climate change in 2009. Comparison was also made with a survey carried out by Al-BiaWal-Tanmia (Environment & Development) magazine [in 2000](http://www.afedmag.com/english/) . 

**A. Environment Outlook**
 
Among the 31,000 people surveyed in the 22 members of the League of Arab States, 72% indicated that the environmental situation in their countries worsened over the past 10 years. This constitutes a remarkable 20% increase over the negative classification [in 2006](http://www.afedonline.org/afedreport/full english report.pdf) which then stood at 60%. It is interesting to note that the 2006 results showed a big improvement over 2000, when 85% said that the environmental situation worsened. This means that what the Arab public saw as a gain for the environment between 2000 and 2006 was wiped out between 2006 and 2015. The biggest drop in confidence was recorded in countries that witnessed wars and conflicts. Tunisia presents a salient example, as in 2006 it recorded the highest percentage of people who thought the environment became better (54%), while in 2015 this dropped to just 4%, with 84% saying it worsened and 12% saying it has not changed. Across the region, an average of 82% thought that governments were not doing enough to tackle environmental challenges. The majority of those dissatisfied were in Lebanon, Palestine and Sudan (over 90% in the three countries). The percentage of those who thought their governments were doing enough for the environment reached 29% in the Gulf Cooperation Council countries (GCC), representing the highest level in the region. 

Solid waste management, traffic congestion and inefficiency of water and energy use scored as the top environmental challenges, followed by industrial pollution, air quality, wastewater disposal and food safety. While top 10 priorities remain the same in 2015 as in 2006, it was remarkable to see that traffic congestion moved from position 11 to position 2, which reflects the mounting gravity of road overcrowding and inadequate public transport systems in the Arab region. 

As to the impact of climate change, 88% indicated that this posed a real threat to their countries – a 5% increase over those who answered likewise in 2006. We believe that the extreme weather conditions witnessed in some parts of the region over the past years, including cyclone Gonu in Oman, recurrent untimely heavy rainstorms in Gulf countries and extended droughts in other parts of the region, were major contributors to this shift in responses. Stronger scientific evidence and better public awareness about climate change also should also have contributed to this result. 

**B. Consumption Patterns**

The [AFED](http://www.afedonline.org/en/) Sustainable Consumption survey revealed acceptable levels of public awareness on environmental matters related to consumption patterns. While 72% of the respondents were aware that the Arab region was the world’s poorest in water resources, 77% knew that the level of water and energy consumption in some Arab countries is among the highest. Asked to identify the main reason behind high water and energy consumption at the household level, a majority of 46% attributed the wasteful behavior to lack of awareness. A mere 6% put the blame on subsidies, with the highest scores as compared to the regional average coming from Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait (46, 19 and 18%). This can be explained by the fact that the three countries witnessed heated debates on the issue over the past two years, with officials endorsing phasing out of subsidies. The strongest statement against subsidies came from the Omani minister of oil and gas, who declared in 2013 that “what is really destroying us right now is subsidies...we simply need to raise the price of petrol and electricity”. 

Another example showing that informed official positions help shape public opinion is that 85% of the respondents said they used energy-saving lamps, while only 45% used water-saving devices at home. This is a result of the intensive programs which made energy-saving lamps available and easily accessible in the markets, including the distribution of free energy-saving bulbs in Egypt, Morocco, Lebanon and the UAE. This was in contrast to meager marketing support for water- saving devices. 

As a follow up, participants were asked whether they were ready to pay more for water, electricity and fuel if this contributed to more sustainable use of natural resources. The question made the proposition conditional on compensating higher prices (as a result of phasing out subsidies) by offering direct benefits including higher salaries, better job opportunities, education, health and pension. 77% agreed to pay more when it came as part of a package, compared to a mere 6% who attributed the waste in water and energy use to subsidies. This presents a clear indication that people accept change as a package supported by the right enabling conditions, including appropriate incentives. 

Efficiency was the most important driving factor for most respondents (42%) when buying a car or electrical appliance, which reflects more concern about saving energy. Brand name and price consecutively followed. Fuel and electricity saving was of less concern in countries where prices are highly subsidized, reaching a low of 16% for cars in Qatar, compared to a high of 72% in Jordan. It is worth to note that Jordan was a regional pioneer in promoting hybrid and fuel-efficient cars, through offering a tax-break program. At sub-regional level, efficiency and price were lower factors in the GCC countries, while brand, model and size had a higher rank. Although Saudi Arabia was the first Arab country to introduce fuel economy labeling and standards for imported vehicles in 2014, the impact of this measure on consumers is still to be seen. 

The survey revealed that an equal percentage of respondents used private cars and public transport as the main means of mobility (47% for each), with the remaining 6% using motorbikes and bicycles. The extensive use of private cars in the GCC countries – about 89% on average – is explained by higher income levels, very low fuel prices, and a lack of modern public transport systems. Lebanon was an exception to the other Arab countries, with a staggering 72% using private cars – a reflection of inadequate public transport systems. While 82% of respondents at the regional level agreed to share a personal car with others to go to work, attaining such a scheme on a large scale can only be possible when supported by programs for car-pooling, allocating strategically-located public areas for drivers to meet and share cars. 

A majority of the respondents (89%) said they were aware that Arab countries import half of the basic food products they consume, and 88% preferred locally produced food over imported food. Frequency of fast food consumption revealed uniform moderate patterns, with 61% buying fast food 1-5 times per month, and 21% not eating fast food at all. Those who buy fast food more than 6 times a month in the region amounted to 18%, compared to 24% in the GCC countries alone. 

Cost of food constituted the largest portion of the family income, compared to water and energy. 62% of respondents spent over 10% of their income on food, while only 4% of respondents spent this same proportion of their income on water and electricity. 

Changing dietary habits is a crucial issue, involving intricate social and cultural values and traditions. Dwindling water resources is likely to prevent countries from producing enough quantity of a certain traditional crop, like rice, for an ever growing population. The same applies to red meat, as raising cattle is a water-intensive activity. Moreover, cows produce a particularly high level of greenhouse gases, which intensifies climate change. Are people ready to shift to other products that are less water intensive and friendlier to the environment, such as alternative grains, fish and poultry? If the change in dietary habits would protect the environment, 84% of the respondents were ready to go for it. An astounding majority of 99% would change their habits if this would ensure their health, such as fighting obesity, diabetes and blood fats. Taking into consideration that what is better for the health is better for the environment, as most cases show, the results might indicate that a good approach to promote positive change in food consumption patterns is to put more emphasis on the health benefits, as these are more appreciated by the public. 

The main conclusion of [AFED's](http://www.afedonline.org/en/) public opinion survey on sustainable consumption patterns is that the Arab public is ready to endorse and implement profound changes in the way water, energy and food are consumed, provided that the shift is combined with appropriate enabling conditions and incentives. Alternative products and practices can only be popularized through measures that make them attainable and accessible at competitive prices.